---
title: "SQL :one::one: Operation & Optimization"
date: 2019-02-01
tags: []
excerpt: "System commands, Error Handling, SCD's & Other"
mathjax: true
---

This is the eight in a series of SQL notes I made during the [Kubrick](https://kubrickgroup.com/) Data Engineering training course. The others are:  
[#1: Database Design]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL1)  
[#2: SQL Design]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL2)  
[#3: DQL]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL3)  
[#4: DDL]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL4)  
[#5: DML]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL5)  
[#6: Sorting]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL6)  
[#7: Joining]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL7)  
[#8: Temporary Tables]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL8)  
[#9: Programmable Objects]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL9)  
[#10: Indexing]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL10)  

All the posts in this series are my personal note taking and may be updated as the course progresses.  

---
# Transactions
A transaction is a sequence of operations performed as a single logical unit of work, which must adhere to **ACID**. Transactions are only used within *DML* (`INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`) as these commands are not instant, the DDL commands commit to the database immediately so have no transaction control.   
It is the responsibility of the database engine to provide mechanisms ensuring the physical integrity of each transaction. SQL programmers are responsible for starting and ending transactions at points that enforce the logical consistency of the data.  

The commands to control a transaction are  
- `COMMIT` to save changes  
- `ROLLBACK` to undo changes  
- `SAVEPOINT` to create a point to `ROLLBACK` to  
- `SET TRANSACTION` to name the transaction  

Transactions can be a good way to encorporate error handling into your code, they should always start with `BEGIN TRAN` and contain at least on of the control commands above.   

```SQL
BEGIN TRAN
BEGIN TRY
	DELETE FROM Production.Product
	WHERE ProductID = 55
	COMMIT TRAN
END TRY
BEGIN CATCH
	PRINT 'ProductID 55 does not exist, could not delete'
	ROLLBACK TRAN
END CATCH
```

### Transaction Isolation Levels
There are various levels of *transaction isolation* that can be set for a table or query.  
A query level can be set using `WITH (<LEVEL>)` for example; `SELECT * FROM Production.Product WITH (NOLOCK)` gives the query **READ UNCOMMITTED** access to the table.  
 
To set a global isolation level for a session, the following script should be executed after connecting to a server.  

```sql
SET TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL 
    { READ UNCOMMITTED --Pessimistic 
    | READ COMMITTED   --(DEFAULT) 
    | REPEATABLE READ 
    | SNAPSHOT 
    | SERIALIZABLE  --Optimistic 
    }
```  

#### Read Uncommitted: 
Queries can read rows that have been modified by other transactions but not yet committed. It's possible with this statement to read rows that have been *modified* but not *committed* to the database, a **dirty read**. **Nonreapeatable reads** or **phantom reads** are also possible, these are when data is modified by another transaction between statements in the user transaction.

#### Read Committed: 
Queries cannot read data that has been modified but not committed by other transactions. **Nonrepeatable reads** and **phantom reads** are still possible. 

#### Repeatable Read: 
Queries cannot read data that has been modified but not yet committed by other transactions and other transactions can modify data that has been read by the current transaction until the current transaction completes. This prevents diry reads and nonrepeatable reads. **Phantom reads** are still possible if the user transaction reads rows twice and another transaction inserts rows inbetween.  

#### Snapshot: 
The query works off a *snapshot* of the data as it was at the start of the transaction. No locking or blocking happens with snapshot and this prevents all types of dirty, nonrepeatable, or phantom reads. 

#### Serializable: 
Range locks are placed in the range of key values that match the search conditions of each statement executed in a transaction. This blocks other transactions from updating or inserting any rows that would create dirty, nonrepeatable, or phantom reads. However serializable isolation can have a big impact on computational cost.  


# System commands  
### System Information  
- `sys.dm_db_index_usage_stats` - Shows usage stats for all indexes  
- `sys.dm_db_index_physical_stats` - Shows physical stats for all indexes  
- `sys.schemas` - Contains info on schemas  
- `sys.tables` - Contains info on tables  
- `sys.columns` - Contains info on columns  
- `sys.types` - Contains info on types  

### Database Console Commands  
`DBCC` statements allow a user to write a ‘console command’ which controls the database in some high level way. Commands can be grouped into **Maintanence**, **Miscellaneous**, **Informational**, and **Validation**.  
An example would `SHOW_STATISTICS` which shows key figures for a supplied table.  
```SQL
DBCC SHOW_STATISTICS('Sales.SalesOrderDetail')
```  


# Error Handling  
The following script will return an error code for the current transaction (0 is no error)  

```SQL
SELECT @@ERROR
```  

The following script will create `log_table`, attempt to divide by 0 and if (when) it fails, print the `ERROR_MESSAGE()` and insert it into the `log_table`.  

```SQL
CREATE TABLE log_table(error_msg NVARCHAR(500))

BEGIN TRAN
DECLARE @denom FLOAT = 0
BEGIN TRY
	SELECT 500/@denom
END TRY
BEGIN CATCH
	PRINT 'uh oh, ' + ERROR_MESSAGE()  
	ROLLBACK TRAN
	INSERT INTO log_table (error_msg)  -- Log error
	SELECT ERROR_MESSAGE()
END CATCH
```  

# Statistics  
`SET STATISTICS IO ON` before an operation will display the scan count, logical reads, physical reads and more of the operation in the messages tab.  
`SET STATISTICS TIME ON` displays the CPU and elapsed time for an operation to complete.  

# Slowly Changing Dimensions  