---
title: "SQL :eight: Temporary tables"
date: 2019-02-01
tags: []
excerpt: "CTE's & Temp tables"
mathjax: true
---

This is the eighth in a series of SQL notes I made during the [Kubrick](https://kubrickgroup.com/) Data Engineering training course. The others are:  
[#1: Database Design]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL1)  
[#2: SQL Design]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL2)  
[#3: DQL]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL3)  
[#4: DDL]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL4)  
[#5: DML]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL5)  
[#6: Sorting]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL6)  
[#7: Joining]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL7)  
[#9: Programmable Objects]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL9)  
[#10: Indexing]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL10)  
[#11: Operation & Optimization]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL11)  

All the posts in this series are my personal note taking and may be updated as the course progresses.  

---
# Common Table Expressions
A CTE is a type of temporary table that can be used to help with complex multi-select queries and joins. The syntax to create one is:  

```sql
WITH cte(ctePrice)
AS
(
    SELECT ListPrice 
    FROM Production.Product
)
```  

To use it:  

```sql
SELECT ctePrice
FROM cte
```

The CTE can have its own column names and acts just like a normally defined table.  

### Recursive CTEs
Recursive CTEs are able to reference themselves and are particularly good at dealing with hierarchical data.

A recursive routine has three main parts:  
- Invocation: Calls the recursive routine  
- Recursive Invocation of the Routine: Calls itself  
- Termination Check: Logic that to terminal routine at some point  

The following script will output a column `n` with numbers counting from 1-50 in the rows 1-50.  

```sql
WITH cte
AS     
(SELECT 1 AS n -- Anchor member
    UNION ALL
    SELECT n + 1 -- Recursive member
    FROM   cte
    WHERE  n < 50 -- Terminator
)

SELECT n
FROM   cte -- Invocation
```  

The *Anchor* starts off the loop, it is joined row-wise by `UNION ALL` to the *Recursive* which is `n + 1` where `n` is from the `cte`. It continues to add 1 into each new row until the *Terminator* enforces `n < 50`.  

Every recursive CTE must have all anchors before recursives, as well as the anchor and recursive members all having the same columns to allow `UNION ALL`. Additionally, the `FROM` expression may only refer to the CTE once and the following expressions are not allowed `GROUP BY`, `HAVING`, `LEFT`, `RIGHT`, `OUTER JOIN`, Scalar aggregation, `SELECT DISTINCT`, Subqueries, `TOP`.  

# Temporary Tables
A temporary table can be created just like normal tables in SQL. They are logged and stored in physical memory in tempdb. They are distinguished using `#`.  
The difference from a normal table is that the scope of any particular temporary table is the session in which it is created. Also if they are created inside a stored procedure they are destroyed upon completion of the stored procedure. The syntax to create and use one is the same.  

```sql
CREATE TABLE dbo.#bigSales
(
     saleID INT NOT NULL
    ,storeID INT
    ,category VARCHAR(10)
)
```
