---
title: "SQL :two: SQL Design"
date: 2019-02-01
tags: []
excerpt: "Constructs, tables, & set up"
mathjax: true
---

This is the second in a series of SQL notes I made during the [Kubrick](https://kubrickgroup.com/) Data Engineering training course. The others are:  
[#1: Database Design]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL1)  
[#3: DQL]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL3)  
[#4: DDL]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL4)  
[#5: DML]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL5)  
[#6: Sorting]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL6)  
[#7: Joining]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL7)  
[#8: Temporary Tables]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL8)  
[#9: Programmable Objects]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL9)  
[#10: Indexing]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL10)  
[#11: Operation & Optimization]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL11)  

All the posts in this series are my personal note taking and may be updated as the course progresses.  

In [SQL#1]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL1), I laid out some of the concepts and structures of the modern databases that SQL interacts with. This post will follow on from that by introducing SQL as a language.  

---
# SQL Constructs
Within the T-SQL language there are multiple *constructs* which are almost mini languages, each with a unique function. 

### Data Query Language (DQL)
Queries are requests to the database to retrieve some data in a particular format. This is done with the `SELECT` function. 

### Data Definition Language (DDL)
Data can be directly edited using the `CREATE`, `DROP`, and `ALTER` functions.

### Data Manipulation Language (DML)
Data is manipulated and changed using `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE`.

### Data Control Language (DCL)
Finally, user access to a database can be controlled using `GRANT`, `DENY`, and `REVOKE`.

---
# Table Organisation

### Object Names
Objects in SQL have the following naming convention: `SERVERNAME.DBNAME.SCHEMA.OBJECT` where the shema represents the *entity* for which the object is an *attribute*. 

### Data Fields
The data fields for a table usually go in order (columns left to right). The order of the columns to be selected is arbritary unless exporting to Python or R when a particular order may be preferred. The following order is a general standard but different organisations may have their own style guide.  
1. :key: Local Keys
- Surrogate
- Business
2. :key: Foreign Keys
3. :date: Dates 
4. :page_facing_up: Attributes (strings)
5. :hash: Measures (numeric)
6. :warning: Metadata 

### Data Types
SQL accepts a number of datatypes for variables. The common `INT` and `CHAR` types are listed along with their attributes.  

|Data type|Size|Features|
|---|---|---|
|`TINYINT`|1 byte|Unsigned (+)|
|`SMALLINT`|2 byte|Signed (+/-)|
|`INT`|4 byte|Signed (+/-)|
|`BIGINT`|8 byte|Signed (+/-)|
|`VARCHAR`|1 byte/char|Non-UNICODE, Variable width, maxchar=8000|
|`CHAR`|1 byte/char|Non-UNICODE, Fixed width, maxchar=8000|
|`NVARCHAR`|2 byte/char|UNICODE, Variable width, maxchar=4000|
|`NCHAR`|2 byte/char|UNICODE, Fixed width, maxchar=4000|
|`VARBINARY`|1 byte/int + 2|Store 'blobs' of binary, maxchar=4000|

Other datatypes available in SQL are `MONEY`, `DATE`, `DATETIME`(to milliseconds) , `DATETIME2` (to nanoseconds), `DATETIMEOFFSET` (with timezone). `SQL_VARIANT` is a special data type which can hold any type of value.  

---
# Environment Set-Up
When using SQL client side software a connection must be made to a relevant SQL server. If the server is running on your own computer you can use the address `.` or `127.0.0.1` which both refer to 'self'. Once connected, a new query can be initiated for that server.  

A database is selected using the `USE` keyword;
```SQL
USE AdventureWorks
GO
```  

Once this is done the client knows the `SERVERNAME` and the `DBNAME` so any reference to a table only requires `SCHEMA.OBJECT`. The default Schema name is `dbo` so it is possible to just referenct the object name, if that object is the default `dbo.OBJECT`.  
`GO` is the syntax used to seperate transactions, everything between `GO` statements will operate as a transaction before anything afterwards.
