---
title: "SQL #6: Sorting"
date: 2019-02-01
tags: []
excerpt: "GROUP BY, Window Functions, PIVOT"
mathjax: true
---

This is the sixth in a series of SQL notes I made during the [Kubrick](https://kubrickgroup.com/) Data Engineering training course. The others are:  
[#1: Database Design]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL1)  
[#2: SQL Design]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL2)  
[#3: DQL]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL3)  
[#4: DDL]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL4)  
[#5: DML]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL5)  
[#7: Joining]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL7)  
[#8: Temporary Tables]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL8)  
[#9: Programmable Objects]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL9)  
[#10: Indexing]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL10)  
[#11: Operation & Optimization]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/SQL11)  

All the posts in this series are my personal note taking and may be updated as the course progresses.  

---
# GROUP BY
`GROUP BY` is used to aggregate values by some grouping and defines a *new level of detail* for the query. This means it can only return columns which are either in the `GROUP BY` or in the aggregation. For example:

```sql
    SELECT 
         color
        ,sum(standardcost) AS sumcost
        ,count(*) AS cnt
    FROM Production.Product
    GROUP BY color
```
This query displays the total standard costs of the products in `Production.Product` by colour. `color` is in the `GROUP BY` and both `standardcost` and `*` are aggregated.  

---
# Window Functions
Window functions perform a calculation over a set of rows. The `OVER` keyword determines the *window* (partitioning and ordering of a set of rows) and is required in every window function. A *function* (calculation) is then applied on the window. It keeps the same level of detail as the original table. This means a single query can return both detailed AND aggregate data.  

The various options for `OVER` are listed below. 
```sql
OVER (    
    PARTITION BY <clause> 
    ORDER BY <clause>   
    ROW or RANGE <clause>   
      )
```  

### PARTITION BY
`PARTITION BY` acts a bit like a `GROUP BY`, applying an aggregate to a group but it will return the result for *each* row.  

```sql
SELECT
     OrderLineID
    ,StockItemID
    ,UnitPrice
    ,AVG(UnitPrice) OVER (PARTITION BY StockItemID) Avg_LinePrice
From Sales.Orderlines
```  
This query will return some details about each product and an aggregates average price for that StockItemID. This allows us to compare the price for that particular product to the average for the line.  

### ORDER BY
If the order of rows is important to the function then `ORDER BY` is used (this is independent of the `SELECT` `ORDER BY`). Ordering is generally computationally expensive as it requires scanning.  


### Ranking Functions
Ranking functions will return an index number related to some ranking, they must be used with `ORDER BY` to define the ranking criteria. Each of the following, except `NTILE`, differs in how 'tied' rows are labelled.  
- `ROW_NUMER() OVER (ORDER BY <col2>)`: Gives a row number if ordered by a condition, ignores ties [1,2,3]  
- `RANK() OVER (ORDER BY <col2>)`: Like `ROW_NUMBER` but tied values are given tied position in rank [1,1,3]  
- `DENSE_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY <col2>)`: Like `RANK` but tied values only occupy one rank value [1,1,2]  
- `NTILE(n)`: Segments data into `n` evenly sized tiles/buckets   

### Analytics Functions
These are four common **Analytics functions** that can be used over a window. 

`FIRST_VALUE` and `LAST VALUE` give the highest or lowest ranked value for some sorting. The following query gives the `OrderID` for the first order by each customer.  

```sql
SELECT
     CustomerID
    ,OrderID
    ,FIRST_VALUE(OrderID) OVER (PARTITION BY OrderID ORDER BY OrderDate, CustomerID ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING)
FROM Sales.Sales
```
The `ROWS UNBOUNDED PRECEDING` setting specifies how far into the past or future to search. The options are `UNBOUNDED` or `CURRENT` for distance and `PRECEDING` or `FOLLOWING` to choose past or future.  
  
Similar to `FIRST_VALUE` and `LAST_VALUE`, `LAG` and `LEAD` allow us to effectively join the table to itself on the partition keys and reach into the joined set to retrieve the next value, or previous value. `LEAD` gives the first value and `LAG` the last.  

---
# Pivot  
Pivot is a way of re-organising and aggregating tables. A table can be 'pivotted' to list the total price of each ProductCode by color:  

```sql
SELECT *
FROM
(
SELECT 
	 left(productnumber, 2) AS ProductCode
	,ISNULL(color, 'NA') Color
	,ListPrice
FROM Production.Product
) R

PIVOT
(
SUM(listprice) FOR color IN ([NA], [Black], [Blue], [Grey], [Multi], [Red], [Silver] ,[Silver/Black] ,[White] ,[Yellow])
)Piv
```  

The pivot command can be useful when there are multiple columns with the same details except for one, multiple email addresses for one person for example. A second column can be made and pivotted into to store 'email2'. In that example there's no real aggregation but an aggregation *must* be defined, so just use `MAX()` or something.  

More likely is the need to 'unpivot' a table to group some spread out data into buckets if it was set out column wise:  
```sql
SELECT *
FROM
(
SELECT 
	 left(productnumber, 2) AS ProductCode
	,ISNULL(color, 'NA') Color
	,ListPrice
FROM Production.Product
) R

UNPIVOT
(
SUM(listprice) FOR color IN ([NA], [Black], [Blue], [Grey], [Multi], [Red], [Silver] ,[Silver/Black] ,[White] ,[Yellow])
)Unpiv
```

The unpivot command knows that the columns in the `SELECT` statement are the unique combination of values by which to aggregate. 

### Dynamic Pivot
Typing every column to pivot on is slow, it is possible to do a dynamic pivot by declaring a list of columns to pivot on.  

```sql
DECLARE @cols NVARCHAR(MAX)
DECLARE @query NVARCHAR(MAX)

SET @cols = STUFF((SELECT DISTINCT ',' + QUOTENAME(AgeBucket)
FROM training.populationByAge c
for XML PATH(''), TYPE 
).VALUE('.', 'NVARCHAR(MAX)'),1,1,'')

SELECT @cols
```  

`@cols` now stores a list of age buckets that could be used for a pivot. `NVARCHAR` must be used here becuase dynamic SQL commands require Unicode.  